\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename java2html.info
@settitle Java2html
@c %**end of header

@c @setchapternewpage odd

@ifinfo
This is the documentation of GNU java2html.

Copyright 2000 Lorenzo Bettini
@end ifinfo

@finalout
@titlepage
@title GNU java2html
@subtitle An html generator with syntax highlighting for Java sources
@subtitle Version 1.6
  
@author by Lorenzo Bettini
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000 Lorenzo Bettini
 
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``Copying'' is included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage
@page

@iftex
\sloppy
@end iftex

@node    Top,  Introduction, , (dir)
@comment node-name, next,previous, up

@menu
* Introduction::                What is java2html for?
* Installation::                Let's set it up!
* Usage::                       The first chapter is the
 only chapter in this sample.
* Concept Index::               This index has two entries.
@end menu

@node Introduction, Installation, Top, top
@chapter Introduction

Java2html is a simple program that, given a source java file, produces an html
source with syntax highlighting. The colors and the styles can be
specified (bold, italics, underline) by means of a configuration
file, and some other options can be
specified at the command line.

@node Installation, Usage, Introduction, top
@chapter Installation

See the file @file{INSTALL} for detailed building and 
installation instructions;
anyway if you're used to compiling Linux software that comes with sources
you may simply follow the usual procedure, i.e. untar the file
you downloaded in a directory and then:

@example
cd <source code main directory>
./configure
make
make install
@end example

Note: unless you specify a different install directory by 
@code{--prefix} option of
configure (e.g. @code{./configure --prefix=<your home>}), 
you must be root to run @code{make install}.

Files will be installed in the following directories:

@table @code
@item Executables
        @code{/prefix/bin}
@item docs and samples
        @code{/prefix/share/doc/java2html}
@item conf files           
        @code{/prefix/share/java2html}
@end table

Default value for prefix is @code{/usr/local} 
but you may change it with @code{--prefix}
option to configure.

@section What you need to build java2html

Actually you need nothing more than a Unix C/C++ compiler

java2html has been developed under Linux, using @emph{gcc} (C++), 
and @emph{bison} (yacc)
and @emph{flex} (lex), and ported under Win32 with 
@emph{Cygnus C/C++ compiler}, available at 
@file{http://www.cygnus.com/}
@ifhtml
<a href="http://www.cygnus.com/">http://www.cygnus.com/</a>
@end ifhtml
(a .DLL is also distributed togheter with the
.exe: you may simply copy it in the same place of the .exe). I used the
excellent GNU @emph{Autoconf} and @emph{Automake}. I also used 
@emph{Autotools}
available at @file{ftp://ftp.ugcs.caltech.edu/pub/elef/autotools}
@ifhtml
<a href="ftp://ftp.ugcs.caltech.edu/pub/elef/autotools">ftp://ftp.ugcs.caltech.edu/pub/elef/autotools</a>
@end ifhtml
which creates a starting
source tree (according to GNU standards) with autoconf, automake starting
files, and finally 
@emph{getopt_long} (for command line parsing).

Actually, unless you want to develop java2html, you don't need all these
tools to build java2html because I provide generated sources; you don't need
neither bison (yacc) nor flex (lex), for the same reason. Actually programs
that use lex generated files need to link with library libfl (or libl for
lex); anyway configuration phase can discover if this library is missing and
in that case it sets the program to link with a source file I provide. This
hack works for flex: I don't know about lex generated scanners. But, again,
this is a problem only if you develop java2html and you use lex.


@node    Usage, Concept Index, Installation, Top
@comment node-name,next,previous, up
@chapter First Chapter
@cindex Sample index entry

This is the contents of the first chapter.
@cindex Another sample index entry

Here is a numbered list.

@enumerate
@item
This is the first item.

@item
This is the second item.
@end enumerate

The @code{makeinfo} and @code{texinfo-format-buffer}
commands transform a Texinfo file such as this into
an Info file; and @TeX{} typesets it for a printed
manual.

@node    Concept Index,    ,  Usage, Top
@comment node-name,    next,  previous, up
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
