\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file uses the @command command introduced in Texinfo 4.0.
@c %**start of header
@setfilename source-highlight-lib.info
@include version-lib.texi
@settitle GNU Source-highlight Library @value{VERSION}
@finalout
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@set myhomepage @uref{http://www.lorenzobettini.it}
@set langfilesurl @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/src-highlite/lang_files/}
@set outlangfilesurl @uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/src-highlite/outlang_files/}
@set srchilitelib Source-highlight library

@macro cind {n}
@cindex \n\
\n\
@end macro

@macro classname {n}
@cindex @code{\n\} class
@code{\n\} class
@end macro

@macro methodname {n}
@cindex @code{\n\} method
@code{\n\} method
@end macro

@macro fieldname {n}
@cindex @code{\n\} field
@code{\n\} field
@end macro

@macro enumname {n}
@cindex @code{\n\} enum
@code{\n\} enum
@end macro

@macro sourcehighlightclass 
@classname{SourceHighlight}
@end macro

@macro sourcehighlight
@cindex @code{source-highlight}
@code{source-highlight}
@end macro

@macro sourcehighlightsettings
@cindex @code{source-highlight-settings}
@code{source-highlight-settings}
@end macro


@copying
This manual is for GNU Source-highlight Library 
(version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
which given a source file, produces a document with syntax highlighting.

Copyright @copyright{} 2005-2008 Lorenzo Bettini, @value{myhomepage}.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory C++ Libraries
@direntry
* Source-highlight-lib: (source-highlight-lib).  Highlights contents
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title GNU Source-highlight Library
@subtitle given a source file, produces a document with syntax highlighting.
@subtitle for GNU Source-highlight Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle updated on @value{UPDATED-MONTH}

@author by Lorenzo Bettini, @value{myhomepage}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top GNU Source-highlight Library

GNU Source-highlight, given a source file, produces a document with
syntax highlighting.

This is Edition @value{EDITION} of the Source-highlight Library manual.

This file documents GNU Source-highlight Library version @value{VERSION}.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c All the nodes can be updated using the EMACS command
@c texinfo-every-node-update, which is normally bound to C-c C-u C-e.
@c @node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@c All the menus can be updated with the EMACS command
@c texinfo-all-menus-update, which is normally bound to C-c C-u C-a.
@menu
* Introduction::                What's it for?
* Installation::                
* Use of GNU Source-highlight Library::  
* Main Classes::                
* Global instances::            
* Problems::                    Reporting bugs.
* Mailing Lists::               
* Concept Index::               Index of concepts.
@end menu

@node Introduction, Installation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex features
GNU Source-highlight, given a source file, produces a document with
syntax highlighting.   @inforef{Introduction,,source-highlight} for a
wider introduction about GNU Source-highlight.

This file documents the Library provided by GNU Source-highlight, thus
its audience is programmers only, who want to use source-highlight
features inside their programs, not the users of Source-highlight.
This library is part of GNU Source-highlight since version 3.0.

However, the main principles of GNU Source-highlight will be given for
granted, together with all the notions for writing language definition
files, output definition files, and so on.  Again, we refer to the
documentation of GNU Source-highlight for all these features.

@node Installation, Use of GNU Source-highlight Library, Introduction, Top
@chapter Installation

GNU Source-highlight library is part of GNU Source-highlight, thus it
will be installed together with Source-highlight itself; we refer to
@inforef{Installation,,source-highlight} for further instructions on
installing GNU Source-highlight.  Here we detail only the parts
concerning the library.

@cindex @code{--with-doxygen}
@cindex doxygen
If you want to build and install the API documentation of
Source-highlight library, you need to run @code{configure} with the
option @code{--with-doxygen}, but you need the program @emph{Doxygen},
@url{http://www.doxygen.org}, to build the documentation.
The documentation will be installed in the following directory:

@table @code
@item Library API documentation
        @code{prefix/share/doc/source-highlight/api}
@item library examples
        @code{prefix/share/doc/source-highlight/examples}
@item conf files           
        @code{prefix/share/source-highlight}
@end table

@node Use of GNU Source-highlight Library, Main Classes, Installation, Top
@chapter Use of GNU Source-highlight Library

@cindex libsource-highlight
You can use GNU Source-highlight library in your programs, by including
its headers and linking to the file
@file{libsource-highlight}.ext@footnote{The extension of course depends
on the library being shared or static, e.g., @code{.so}, @code{.la},
@code{.a}, and on the system}.

@cindex namespace
@cindex headers
All the classes of the library are part of the namespace
@code{srchilite}, and all the header files are in the subdirectory
@code{srchilite}.

@menu
* Using Automake and Autotools::  
@end menu

@node Using Automake and Autotools,  , Use of GNU Source-highlight Library, Use of GNU Source-highlight Library
@section Using Automake and Autotools

@cindex autotools
@cindex pkg-config
The easiest way to use GNU Source-highlight library in your program is
to rely on autotools, i.e., @emph{Automake}, @emph{Autoconf}, etc.  In
particular, the library is installed with a
@code{pkg-config}@footnote{@url{http://pkg-config.freedesktop.org}.} 
configuration file (metadata file), @file{source-highlight.pc}.

pkg-config is a tool for helping compiling applications and
libraries. It helps you insert the correct compiler options on the
command line so an application can use @value{srchilitelib} simply
by running

@example
gcc -o test test.c `pkg-config --libs --cflags source-highlight`  
@end example

@noindent
rather than hard-coding values on where to find the library.  Moreover,
this will provide also with the correct compiler flags and libraries
used by @value{srchilitelib} itself, e.g., Boost Regex library.

@cindex @code{PKG_CONFIG_PATH}
Note that @code{pkg-config} searches for @file{.pc} files in its
standard directories.  If you installed the library in a non standard
directory, you'll need to set the @code{PKG_CONFIG_PATH} environment
variable accordingly.  
For instance, if I install the library into
@code{/usr/local/lib}, the @file{.pc} file will be installed into
@code{/usr/local/lib/pkgconfig}, and then I'll need to call
@code{pkg-config} as follows:

@example
PKG_CONFIG_PATH=/usr/local/lib/pkgconfig \
        pkg-config --libs --cflags source-highlight
@end example

In your @file{configure.ac} you can use the autoconf macro provided
by @code{pkg-config}; here is an example:

@example
# Checks for libraries.
PKG_CHECK_MODULES(SRCHILITE, [source-highlight >= 3.0])
AC_SUBST(SRCHILITE_CFLAGS)
AC_SUBST(SRCHILITE_LIBS)
@end example

Then, you can use the variables @code{SRCHILITE_CFLAGS} and
@code{SRCHILITE_LIBS} in your makefiles accordingly.
For instance,

@example
...
AM_CPPFLAGS = $(SRCHILITE_CFLAGS)
...
LDADD = $(SRCHILITE_LIBS)
...
@end example

@node Main Classes, Global instances, Use of GNU Source-highlight Library, Top
@chapter Main Classes

Here we present the main classes of the @value{srchilitelib},
together with some example of use.
For the documentation of all the classes (and methods of the classes)
we refer to the generated API documentation (see @xref{Installation}).

You will note that often, methods and constructors of the
classes of the libraries do not take a pointer or a reference
to a class, say @code{MyClass}, but an object of type @code{MyClassPtr};
these are
@cindex shared pointers
@emph{shared pointers}, in particular the ones provided by the Boost
libraries (they are typedefs using, e.g.,
@code{boost::shared_ptr<MyClass>}).  This will avoid dangerous dangling
pointers and possible memory leaks in the library.

If on the contrary, a method or a constructor in a class of the library
takes a standard pointer, say @code{MyClass *}, then that class will
NEVER delete such pointer.  It is up to the actual owner the object of
@code{MyClass *} to delete the object when it is not needed anymore.

The classes of the libraries can raise exceptions if errors are
encountered (e.g., an input file cannot be opened, or a language
definition file cannot be parsed); the exception classes can be found in
the API documentation, and all exception classes inherit from
@classname{std::exception}.

@menu
* SourceHighlight class::       
* Customizing Formatting::      
* Events and Listeners::        
* Settings::                    
* Utility functions::           
@end menu

@node SourceHighlight class, Customizing Formatting, Main Classes, Main Classes
@section SourceHighlight class

The @sourcehighlightclass{} is the class of the library that basically
implements all the functionalities used by the program
@sourcehighlight{} itself; thus it highlights an input file generating
an output file.  It can be configured with many options, and basically
it has a get/set methods for all the command line options of
@sourcehighlight{} (we refer also to @inforef{Invoking
source-highlight,,source-highlight}).

For instance, the following example
(@file{source-highlight-console-main.cpp}) highlights an input file to
the console (the colors are obtained through ANSI color escape sequences
(so you need a console program that supports this):

@include source-highlight-console-main.cpp.texinfo

Note that if a file name is passed at the command line, the program
tries to detect the source language by using a @classname{LangMap}
object, specifying the map file @file{lang.map}, which is the one
mapping file extensions to language definition files (e.g., if the file
name has extension @file{.java} it will use the corresponding
@file{java.lang}).  Otherwise we assume that we want to highlight
a C++ file.

All the highlighting is performed by the @methodname{highlight}; since
we don't specify an output file name it will output the highlighted
result directly to the console.  In case we don't have an input filename
either, @methodname{highlight} will read from the standard input.  Since
the highlighting takes place one line per time, you can test the program
this way: you'll enter a line on the console and when you press enter,
the program will echo the same line highlighted.

The @code{DATADIR} is not even mandatory, provided you installed
Source-highlight correctly, or that you set it up, using
@sourcehighlightsettings{} program.

@node Customizing Formatting, Events and Listeners, SourceHighlight class, Main Classes
@section Customizing Formatting

The formatting of @value{srchilitelib}, i.e., how to actually perform
the highlighting, or what to do when we need to highlight something, can
be completely customized; the library detects (using regular expressions
based on language definition files) that something must be highlighted
as, say, a keyword, and you can then do whatever you want with this
information.  The default formatting strategy is to output an
highlighted text using a specific formatting format, but you're free to
do whatever you like, if you want.

This formatting abstraction is done through @classname{Formatter}, which
basically declares only the abstract @methodname{format} which takes as
parameters the string to format, and further (possibly empty) additional
parameters, implemented by @classname{FormatterParams}.  Note that the
@methodname{format} does not get as an argument how the passed string
must be formatted (e.g., as a keyword, as a type, etc.); this
information must be stored in the formatter from the start.  Indeed, the
mapping between a language element and a formatter is performed by
@classname{FormatterManager}.  An object of this class must be created
by specifying a default formatter object, that will be used when the
formatter manager will be queried for a formatter for a specific
language element that it is not able to handle (in this it will fall
back by returning the default formatter).

@menu
* Completely Customized Formatting::  
* Style-based Customized Formatting::  
@end menu

@node Completely Customized Formatting, Style-based Customized Formatting, Customizing Formatting, Customizing Formatting
@subsection Completely Customized Formatting

You can implement a completely customized formatting strategy.  For
instance, this is a customized formatter (@file{infoformatter.h}) which,
when requested to format a string, it simply writes this information
specifying which kind of language element it is, and the position in the
line (the @fieldname{start} in @classname{FormatterParams}).  Note that
the language element is stored in a field of the class, and it is set at
object creation time.  We avoid to write anything if we are requested to
format something as @code{"normal"}, or if the string to format is empty.

@include infoformatter.h.texinfo

For convenience we also declare a typedef for the shared pointer (since
the formatter manager takes only shared pointers to formatters).

In order to customize the formatting, there are some more steps
to do, and in particular, you cannot use @classname{SourceHighlight} anymore
but you need to use more classes.

First of all, you need @classname{LangDefManager} which takes care of
building the regular expressions starting from a language definition
file; in order to do this it uses a @classname{HighlightRuleFactory}
object; for the moment, only the implementation based on boost regular
expression exists, so you can simply pass an object of
@classname{RegexRuleFactory}.  Once you have an object of
@classname{LangDefManager}, you can use the
@methodname{getHighlightState} to build the 
@cind{automaton} to perform the
highlight (in particular the initial state of such automaton, of
@classname{HighlightState}), and you should pass this to an object that
can use the automaton to perform the highlighting.  To do this, you can
use @classname{SourceHighlighter} whose objects can be used to highlight
a line of text, using @methodname{highlightParagraph}.

You can then create a @classname{FormatterManager} object and populate
it with your formatters and set it to the @classname{SourceHighlighter}
object.  The following example (@file{infoformatter-main.cpp}) shows how
to perform these steps; note that we can share the same formatter for
different language elements:

@include infoformatter-main.cpp.texinfo

Note that, since we highlight a line a time, we must reset the
@fieldname{start} each time we start to examine a new line.

For simplicity this example highlights only C++ code and reads directly
from the standard input and writes to the standard output.  This is a
run of the example reading from the standard input (so each time you
insert a line you get the output of your formatters):

@example
// this is a comment
comment: //, start: 0
comment:  this is a comment, start: 2
#include <foobar.h>
preproc: #include, start: 0
string: <foobar.h>, start: 9
int abc = 100 + 5;
keyword: int, start: 0
symbol: =, start: 8
number: 100, start: 10
symbol: +, start: 14
number: 5, start: 16
symbol: ;, start: 17
@end example

@node Style-based Customized Formatting,  , Completely Customized Formatting, Customizing Formatting
@subsection Style-based Customized Formatting

Source-highlight can rely on style (and css style) files for generating
formatting.  Usually, the formatters are built according to the output
format, specified through @file{.outlang} files, @inforef{Output
Language Definitions,,source-highlight}.  However, you can also create
your own formatters based on the information of the style file (or css
style file).  During the parsing of these style files, a
@classname{FormatterFactory} object is used by the library, and you can
provide a customized factory (the one that is used by the library is
@classname{TextStyleFormatterFactory}).  The only abstract method
of @classname{FormatterFactory} is @methodname{createFormatter}.

In order to parse a style file, you can use the static methods of the
@classname{StyleFileParser}, which require the file name of the style
file (and possibly the path to search for the style file, otherwise the
default one is used), the factory to create formatters, and a reference
to a string where the document background color will be stored.  The
methods are @methodname{parseStyleFile} and
@methodname{parseCssStyleFile}.

For instance, let's create a customized formatter
@file{styleformatter.h} that simply prints how a language element will
be formatted (but no formatting will take place); for the sake of
simplicity we will use only public fields:

@include styleformatter.h.texinfo

Now, we create a customized factory (file
@file{styleformatterfactory.h}), implementing the method
@methodname{createFormatter}.  Note that the base class
@classname{FormatterFactory} does not provide any means to store the
created formatters, so it's up to the derived classes to store the
created formatters somewhere:

@include styleformatterfactory.h.texinfo

The @methodname{createFormatter} will be called when parsing a style
file to create a formatter corresponding to a specific language element;
this method should return false if the creation of a formatter failed
(e.g., in this case, if a formatter for a given element had already been
created).  The method is passed the language element name, the colors
for the element as specified in the style file (that can be empty if no
color was specified), and a @enumname{StyleConstants} shared pointer
with formatting informations such as, boldface, italics, etc.  The
factory can use this information to create the customized formatter.

Now, we can use this customized formatter factory in our program
(file @file{styleformatter-main.cpp}):

@include styleformatter-main.cpp.texinfo

Note that, once we created all the formatters with our factory (while
parsing the style file @file{default.style}), we still need to manually
set these formatters in the @classname{FormatterManager} object used by
our highlighter.

For simplicity this example highlights only C++ code and reads directly
from the standard input and writes to the standard output.  This is a
run of the example reading from the standard input (so each time you
insert a line you get the output of your formatters):

@example
/// my class TODO: nothing special
comment: "///"
formatted as: italic color: brown 
comment: " my class "
formatted as: italic color: brown 
todo: "TODO:"
formatted as: bold bgcolor: cyan
comment: " nothing special"
formatted as: italic color: brown 
#include <foobar.h>
preproc: "#include"
formatted as: bold color: darkblue 
string: "<foobar.h>"
formatted as: color: red 
@end example


@node Events and Listeners, Settings, Customizing Formatting, Main Classes
@section Events and Listeners

During the highlighting (and regular expression matching) the library
generates events that can be ``listened'' by using a customized event
listener.  An event is represented by an object of
@classname{HighlightEvent}, which stores the @classname{HighlightToken}
object and the type (an @enumname{HighlightEventType}) of the event.

A customized listener can be implemented by deriving from
@classname{HighlightEventListener} and by defining the virtual method
@methodname{notify}, which, of course, takes an
@classname{HighlightEvent} object as parameter.

For instance, @sourcehighlight{} implements the debugging
functionalities by using a customized listener,
@classname{DebugListener}, whose method implementation we report here as
an example:

@include debuglistener.cpp.texinfo

@node Settings, Utility functions, Events and Listeners, Main Classes
@section Settings

@value{srchilitelib} reads language map files, language definition files,
output format definitions, styles, and other files it needs during the
execution from a specific directory, which we call
@cindex data dir
@emph{data dir}; 
the library comes with an hardcoded value for this path, which is
based on the @code{--prefix} value specified at configuration
time (in particular, it is @code{prefix/share/source-highlight}).
In particular, the user can set the value also with the environment
variable
@cindex @code{SOURCE_HIGHLIGHT_DATADIR}
@code{SOURCE_HIGHLIGHT_DATADIR} (see also the program
@sourcehighlightsettings{} which can store settings in a configuration
file of the user's home, @inforef{The program
source-highlight-settings,,source-highlight}).

When running the program @sourcehighlight{} this value can be overridden with
the command line option @code{--data-dir}
(@inforef{Configuration files,,source-highlight}).

When using the @value{srchilitelib} from a program, one might need to
change the value for data dir, dynamically, and in a consistent way,
i.e., to have a static and single point where this setting can be set
and retrieved.  Note that for the moment, the only setting you can
manage is the value of data dir.

The library provides the @classname{Settings} for this purpose.
Although you can create objects of this class to mainuplate, check and
save settings (you may want to look at the source code of the program
@sourcehighlightsettings{}), you probably only need the static methods
of this class.  You can set the global value of data dir with the
@methodname{setGlobalDataDir}.  The @methodname{retrieveDataDir}
retrieves the value for the data dir.  If the global value was set with
@methodname{setGlobalDataDir} then always returns this global
value. Otherwise, it returns the value of the environment variable
@cindex @code{SOURCE_HIGHLIGHT_DATADIR}
@code{SOURCE_HIGHLIGHT_DATADIR} if set. Otherwise, it returns the value
read from the configuration file.  If also the reading of configuration
file fails, then it returns the hardcoded value.

@node Utility functions,  , Settings, Main Classes
@section Utility functions

If you need to get a list of all the files in the data dir with a
specific role (e.g., language definition files, style files, etc.) you
can use the static methods of the @classname{SourceHighlightUtils},
which will take care of using the data dir specified in the settings
(@ref{Settings}).

@node Global instances, Problems, Main Classes, Top
@section Global instances

The @classname{Instances} provides access to static instances of some
classes that can be used, e.g., to read a language definition file and
create the @cind{automaton} for the highlighting, using
@classname{LangDefManager}, or to access the map of language definition
files, using @classname{LangMap}.  This class ensures that these
instances use the global settings; in particular, if you change the
global settings, you should call the static @methodname{reload}, so that
the instances are updated.

Using these instances also makes the use of some classes easier; for
instance, the beginning part of the @code{main} of the examples shown in
@ref{Customizing Formatting} can be written as follows:

@include instances_example.cpp.texinfo

If you know that you will not use these instances anymore in your
application, and it is crucial to recover all the memory used by these
instances, you then need to call the static @methodname{unload}, and the
memory of these instances will be released.

@node Problems, Mailing Lists, Global instances, Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs
@cindex bugs
@cindex problems

If you find a bug in @command{source-highlight}, please send electronic
mail to

@code{bug-source-highlight at gnu dot org}

Include the version
number, which you can find by running @w{@samp{source-highlight
--version}}.  Also include in your message the output that the program
produced and the output you expected.@refill

If you have other questions, comments or suggestions about
@command{source-highlight}, contact the author via electronic mail
(find the address at @value{myhomepage}).  The author will try to help
you out, although he may not have time to fix your problems.

@node Mailing Lists, Concept Index, Problems, Top
@chapter Mailing Lists
@cindex mailing list

The following mailing lists are available: 

@code{help-source-highlight at gnu dot org}

for generic discussions about the program and for asking for help about
it (open mailing list),
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/help-source-highlight}
 
@code{info-source-highlight at gnu dot org}

for receiving information about new releases and features (read-only
mailing list),
@uref{http://mail.gnu.org/mailman/listinfo/info-source-highlight}.
 
If you want to subscribe to a mailing list just go to the URL and follow
the instructions, or send me an e-mail and I'll subscribe you.

I'll describe new features in new releases also in my blog, at
this URL:

@uref{http://tronprog.blogspot.com/search/label/source-highlight}

@node Concept Index,  , Mailing Lists, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@cindex tail recursion
@printindex cp

@shortcontents


@bye
